README.md, before:

EDPM Ansible
============
[![CodeQL](https://github.com/openstack-k8s-operators/edpm-ansible/actions/workflows/codeql.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/openstack-k8s-operators/edpm-ansible/actions/workflows/codeql.yml)

EDPM Ansible project repository. Contains Ansible roles and plugins for use with EDPM.

Test ansible roles with molecule
--------------------------------

The tests are done with a common environment provided by the
`ci-framework <https://github.com/openstack-k8s-operators/ci-framework/>`__
project. This project provides all the requirement files and
configurations needed for setting up the environment to execute the
``molecule test`` command under the roles. It actually requires
``podman`` for executing the tests in a container.

For setting up the environment and executing the tests:

      $ make execute_molecule

In case the ci-framework project is already cloned we can provide the
folder with ``ENV_DIR=/path/repository``

Note: the instruction ``execute_molecule`` has the
``TEST_ALL_ROLES=yes`` option in the podman command. It will execute
tests in all the roles. In case we want to execute the tests just in
modified roles we should delete it.

Tests can be executed locally, either on per role basis with:

      $ molecule test --all

invoked in ``roles/<rolename>`` directory. Or by testing all roles sequentially:

      $ make execute_molecule_local

Build and push the openstack-ansibleee-runner container image
-------------------------------------------------------------

In order to test a local change to edpm-ansible, the ansible-runner container
image can be rebuilt and pushed to a container repository.

To build the image:

      $ export IMAGE_TAG_BASE=quay.io/<user>/openstack-ansibleee-runner
      $ make openstack_ansibleee_build

To push the image:

      $ export IMAGE_TAG_BASE=quay.io/<user>/openstack-ansibleee-runner
      $ make openstack_ansibleee_push

Depending on the repository, a ``podman login quay.io/<user>`` may be required
before pushing.

License
-------

Copyright 2023.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the “License”); you may
not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain
a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an “AS IS” BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

Commit message:

Enhance instructions for testing local changes
- Add instructions for testing individual roles with molecule
- Add instructions to test local changes via ansibleee using NFS

README.md, after:

EDPM Ansible
============
[![CodeQL](https://github.com/openstack-k8s-operators/edpm-ansible/actions/workflows/codeql.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/openstack-k8s-operators/edpm-ansible/actions/workflows/codeql.yml)

EDPM Ansible project repository. Contains Ansible roles and plugins for use with EDPM.

Test ansible roles with molecule
--------------------------------

The tests are done with a common environment provided by the
`ci-framework <https://github.com/openstack-k8s-operators/ci-framework/>`__
project. This project provides all the requirement files and
configurations needed for setting up the environment to execute the
``molecule test`` command under the roles. It actually requires
``podman`` for executing the tests in a container.

For setting up the environment and executing the tests:

      $ make execute_molecule

In case the ci-framework project is already cloned we can provide the
folder with ``ENV_DIR=/path/repository``

Note: the instruction ``execute_molecule`` has the
``TEST_ALL_ROLES=yes`` option in the podman command. It will execute
tests in all the roles. In case we want to execute the tests just in
modified roles we should delete it.

Tests can be executed locally, either on per role basis with:

      $ molecule test --all

invoked in ``roles/<rolename>`` directory. Or by testing all roles sequentially:

      $ make execute_molecule_local

Build and push the openstack-ansibleee-runner container image
-------------------------------------------------------------

In order to test a local change to edpm-ansible, the ansible-runner container
image can be rebuilt and pushed to a container repository.

To build the image:

      $ export IMAGE_TAG_BASE=quay.io/<user>/openstack-ansibleee-runner
      $ make openstack_ansibleee_build

To push the image:

      $ export IMAGE_TAG_BASE=quay.io/<user>/openstack-ansibleee-runner
      $ make openstack_ansibleee_push

Depending on the repository, a ``podman login quay.io/<user>`` may be required
before pushing.

Run ansibleee pods with a local copy of edpm-ansible
----------------------------------------------------

Local changes to edpm-ansible can also be tested by adding a volume mount to
the ansibleee pods. This will be faster than building a new
openstack-ansibleee-runner container image. See the [edpm-ansible
documentation](https://openstack-k8s-operators.github.io/edpm-ansible/) for
more information.

License
-------

Copyright 2023.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the “License”); you may
not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain
a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an “AS IS” BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
