docs/source/roles/role-edpm_network_config.rst, before:

============================
Role - edpm_network_config
============================

Usage
~~~~~

This Ansible role does the following tasks:

* Read the configured edpm_network_config_tool
  The following choices can be used to configure the host network:
  - nmstate, i.e based on systemroles.network
  - os-net-config, i.e based on custom tasks
  os-net-config is the default tool for this role

* For os-net-config option, this role prepares the host by
  - creating necessary folders and files for rendering network
  templates and NIC mappings (optional)
  - Checks for the presence of required RPMS
  - Uses "provider" ifcfg/nmstate based on flag "edpm_network_config_nmstate"

Note: By default this role will cleanup devices/interfaces not in
"edpm_network_config_template". If there is requirement to keep them
for pre-provisioned nodes, "edpm_network_config_nonconfigured_cleanup"
ansible var can be set to "false".

Here is an example playbook to run os-net-config tool:

.. code-block:: YAML

    - name: Apply network_config
      block:
        - name: Configure host network with edpm-ansible
          include_role:
            name: edpm_network_config
          vars:
            edpm_network_config_template: "{{ nic_config_file }}"

.. literalinclude:: ../../../roles/edpm_network_config/tasks/os_net_config.yml
   :language: YAML

Commit message:

EDPM deployment should not do network cleanup by default
With nmstate-provider set as default for os-net-config,
default cleanup during update/adoption is not desired.
Refer to new remove_config feature support in os-net-config

Signed-off-by: <vcandapp@redhat.com>
Jira: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSPRH-16537
      https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSPRH-17036

docs/source/roles/role-edpm_network_config.rst, after:

============================
Role - edpm_network_config
============================

Usage
~~~~~

This Ansible role does the following tasks:

* Read the configured edpm_network_config_tool
  The following choices can be used to configure the host network:
  - nmstate, i.e based on systemroles.network
  - os-net-config, i.e based on custom tasks
  os-net-config is the default tool for this role

* For os-net-config option, this role prepares the host by
  - creating necessary folders and files for rendering network
  templates and NIC mappings (optional)
  - Checks for the presence of required RPMS
  - Uses "provider" ifcfg/nmstate based on flag "edpm_network_config_nmstate"

Note: * With nmstate-provider as the default for os-net-config,
        "os-net-config --cleanup" should be used only for very
        specific use case, eg
        - SSH provisioned over VLAN-tagged single interface
        - os-net-config needs to override ctlplane over bond+VLAN

      * "os-net-config --cleanup" SHOULD NOT be set for update/adoption
        use case

Here is an example playbook to run os-net-config tool:

.. code-block:: YAML

    - name: Apply network_config
      block:
        - name: Configure host network with edpm-ansible
          include_role:
            name: edpm_network_config
          vars:
            edpm_network_config_template: "{{ nic_config_file }}"

.. literalinclude:: ../../../roles/edpm_network_config/tasks/os_net_config.yml
   :language: YAML
