docs/source/roles/role-edpm_container_manage.rst, before:

===============================
Role - edpm_container_manage
===============================

Usage
~~~~~

Note that right now, only Podman is supported by this role.

This Ansible role allows to do the following tasks:

* Collect container configs data. This data is used as a source of truth on
  which configuration we expect to apply with this role. It means that if
  a container is already managed by this role, no matter its state now,
  the configs data will reconfigure the container if needed.

* Manage systemd shutdown files.
  It takes care of creating the EDPM Container systemd service, required for
  service ordering when it comes to shutdown or start a node. It also manages
  the netns-placeholder service.

* Delete containers that aren't needed anymore or that will need to be
  re-configured. It uses a custom filter, named needs_delete() which has a set
  of rules which allow to determine if whether or not the container needs to be
  deleted.
  These reasons will make the containers not deleted:

  * The container is not managed by edpm_ansible.

  * The container config_id doesn't match with the one in input.

  * The container's name starts with "ceph". Ceph containers are not
    managed by this role.

  Once the previous conditions checked, then these reasons will make the
  containers deleted:

  * The container has no config_data.

  * The container has a config_data which doesn't match the one in input.

  Note that when a container is removed, the role also disable and remove
  the systemd services and healtchecks if present.

* Create containers  in a specific order defined by start_order container
  config, where default is 0.

  * If the container is an exec, we'll run a dedicated playbook for execs,
    using async so multiple execs can be run at the same time.

  * Otherwise, the `podman_container`_ is used, in async, to create the
    containers.
    If the container has a `restart` policy, we'll configure the systemd
    service.
    If the container has a `healthcheck` script, we'll configure the systemd
    healthcheck service.

  Note: `edpm_container_manage_concurrency` parameter is set to 1 by
  default, and putting higher value than 2 can be expose issue with Podman
  locks.

  Here is an example of a playbook:

.. code-block:: YAML

    - name: Manage step_1 containers using edpm-ansible
      block:
        - name: "Manage containers for step 1 with edpm-ansible"
          include_role:
            name: edpm_container_manage
          vars:
            edpm_container_manage_config: "/var/lib/edpm-config/container-startup-config/step_1"
            edpm_container_manage_config_id: "edpm_step1"


Healthchecks
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Previously, the container healthcheck was implemented by a systemd timer which
would run ``podman exec`` to determine if a given container was healthy..
Now, we are using the native healthcheck interface in Podman; which is easier
to integrate and consume.

We are now using the native healthcheck interface in Podman; which is easier to
integrate with and consume.

To check if a container (e.g. keystone)  is healthy, run the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ sudo podman healthcheck run keystone

The return code should be 0 and "healthy" should be printed as the output.
One can also use the ``podman inspect keystone`` output to figure out that
the healthcheck is periodically running and healthy:

.. code-block:: bash

    "Health": {
        "Status": "healthy",
        "FailingStreak": 0,
        "Log": [
            {
                "Start": "2020-04-14T18:48:57.272180578Z",
                "End": "2020-04-14T18:48:57.806659104Z",
                "ExitCode": 0,
                "Output": ""
            },
            (...)
        ]
    }

Debug
~~~~~

The role allows you to perform specific actions on a given container.
This can be used to:

* Run a container with a specific one-off configuration.
* Output the container commands that are run to to manage containers lifecycle.
* Output the changes that would have been made on containers by Ansible.

.. note:: To manage a single container, you need to know 2 things:

   * At which step the container is deployed.

   * The name of the generated JSON file for container config.

Here is an example of a playbook to manage HAproxy container at step 1 which
overrides the image setting in one-off.

.. code-block:: YAML

    - hosts: localhost
      become: true
      tasks:
        - name: Manage step_1 containers using edpm-ansible
          block:
            - name: "Manage HAproxy container at step 1 with edpm-ansible"
              include_role:
                name: edpm_container_manage
              vars:
                edpm_container_manage_config_patterns: 'haproxy.json'
                edpm_container_manage_config: "/var/lib/edpm-config/container-startup-config/step_1"
                edpm_container_manage_config_id: "edpm_step1"
                edpm_container_manage_clean_orphans: false
                edpm_container_manage_config_overrides:
                  haproxy:
                    image: quay.io/edpmmastercentos9/centos-binary-haproxy:hotfix

If Ansible is run in check mode, no container will be removed nor created,
however at the end of the playbook a list of commands will be displayed to show
what would have been run.
This is useful for debug purposes.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ ansible-playbook haproxy.yaml --check

Adding the diff mode will output the changes what would have been made on
containers by Ansible.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ ansible-playbook haproxy.yaml --check --diff

The ``edpm_container_manage_clean_orphans`` parameter is optional
and can be set to `false` to not clean orphaned containers for a
config_id. It can be used to manage a single container without
impacting other running containers with same config_id.

The ``edpm_container_manage_config_overrides`` parameter is optional
and can be used to override a specific container attribute like the image
or the container user. The parameter takes a dictionary where each key is the
container name and its parameters that we want to override. These parameters
have to exist and are the ones that define the container configuration. Note
that it doesn't write down the overrides in the JSON file so if an update /
upgrade is executed, the container will be re-configured with the configuration
that is in the JSON file.


.. include::
   ../collections/osp/edpm/edpm_container_manage_role.rst

.. _podman_container: https://github.com/containers/ansible-podman-collections

Commit message:

Add service cleanup automation
This PR implements the service cleanup functionality with an
edpm_cleanup role.

- edpm_container_standalone creates a state file to keep track of
deployed services on the nodes
- Containers for services not in service list of nodeset would be
cleaned by adding cleanup service to the nodeset services list or
a new deployment with cleanup in 'servicesOverride'
- If a service drops a container it would be automatically cleaned
up
- Service cleanup will also remove containers, startup_config and other
config files along with running the specific cleanup tasks provided in
cleanup.yaml of a role

Note: edpm_nova role has not been changed to work with this for the time
being and would be handled in a separate PR.

jira: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSPRH-19243

Assisted-by: claude-4-sonnet

Signed-off-by: rabi <ramishra@redhat.com>

docs/source/roles/role-edpm_container_manage.rst, after:

===============================
Role - edpm_container_manage
===============================

Usage
~~~~~

Note that right now, only Podman is supported by this role.

This Ansible role allows to do the following tasks:

* Collect container configs data. This data is used as a source of truth on
  which configuration we expect to apply with this role. It means that if
  a container is already managed by this role, no matter its state now,
  the configs data will reconfigure the container if needed.

* Manage systemd shutdown files.
  It takes care of creating the EDPM Container systemd service, required for
  service ordering when it comes to shutdown or start a node. It also manages
  the netns-placeholder service.

* Delete containers that aren't needed anymore or that will need to be
  re-configured. It uses a custom filter, named needs_delete() which has a set
  of rules which allow to determine if whether or not the container needs to be
  deleted.
  These reasons will make the containers not deleted:

  * The container is not managed by edpm_ansible.

  * The container config_id doesn't match with the one in input.

  * The container's name starts with "ceph". Ceph containers are not
    managed by this role.

  Once the previous conditions checked, then these reasons will make the
  containers deleted:

  * The container has no config_data.

  * The container has a config_data which doesn't match the one in input.

  Note that when a container is removed, the role also disable and remove
  the systemd services and healtchecks if present.

* Create containers  in a specific order defined by start_order container
  config, where default is 0.

  * If the container is an exec, we'll run a dedicated playbook for execs,
    using async so multiple execs can be run at the same time.

  * Otherwise, the `podman_container`_ is used, in async, to create the
    containers.
    If the container has a `restart` policy, we'll configure the systemd
    service.
    If the container has a `healthcheck` script, we'll configure the systemd
    healthcheck service.

  Note: `edpm_container_manage_concurrency` parameter is set to 1 by
  default, and putting higher value than 2 can be expose issue with Podman
  locks.

  Here is an example of a playbook:

.. code-block:: YAML

    - name: Manage step_1 containers using edpm-ansible
      block:
        - name: "Manage containers for step 1 with edpm-ansible"
          include_role:
            name: edpm_container_manage
          vars:
            edpm_container_manage_config: "/var/lib/edpm-config/container-startup-config/step_1"
            edpm_container_manage_config_id: "edpm_step1"


Healthchecks
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Previously, the container healthcheck was implemented by a systemd timer which
would run ``podman exec`` to determine if a given container was healthy..
Now, we are using the native healthcheck interface in Podman; which is easier
to integrate and consume.

We are now using the native healthcheck interface in Podman; which is easier to
integrate with and consume.

To check if a container (e.g. keystone)  is healthy, run the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ sudo podman healthcheck run keystone

The return code should be 0 and "healthy" should be printed as the output.
One can also use the ``podman inspect keystone`` output to figure out that
the healthcheck is periodically running and healthy:

.. code-block:: bash

    "Health": {
        "Status": "healthy",
        "FailingStreak": 0,
        "Log": [
            {
                "Start": "2020-04-14T18:48:57.272180578Z",
                "End": "2020-04-14T18:48:57.806659104Z",
                "ExitCode": 0,
                "Output": ""
            },
            (...)
        ]
    }

Debug
~~~~~

The role allows you to perform specific actions on a given container.
This can be used to:

* Run a container with a specific one-off configuration.
* Output the container commands that are run to to manage containers lifecycle.
* Output the changes that would have been made on containers by Ansible.

.. note:: To manage a single container, you need to know 2 things:

   * At which step the container is deployed.

   * The name of the generated JSON file for container config.

Here is an example of a playbook to manage HAproxy container at step 1 which
overrides the image setting in one-off.

.. code-block:: YAML

    - hosts: localhost
      become: true
      tasks:
        - name: Manage step_1 containers using edpm-ansible
          block:
            - name: "Manage HAproxy container at step 1 with edpm-ansible"
              include_role:
                name: edpm_container_manage
              vars:
                edpm_container_manage_config_patterns: 'haproxy.json'
                edpm_container_manage_config: "/var/lib/edpm-config/container-startup-config/step_1"
                edpm_container_manage_config_id: "edpm_step1"
                edpm_container_manage_config_overrides:
                  haproxy:
                    image: quay.io/edpmmastercentos9/centos-binary-haproxy:hotfix

If Ansible is run in check mode, no container will be removed nor created,
however at the end of the playbook a list of commands will be displayed to show
what would have been run.
This is useful for debug purposes.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ ansible-playbook haproxy.yaml --check

Adding the diff mode will output the changes what would have been made on
containers by Ansible.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ ansible-playbook haproxy.yaml --check --diff

.. warning::

    The ``edpm_container_manage_clean_orphans`` parameter is **deprecated** and will be removed in a future release.
    While it still functions, users should migrate to using ``edpm_cleanup_orphaned_containers`` in the
    ``edpm_cleanup`` role instead, which provides better state-file aware orphan cleanup.

The ``edpm_container_manage_config_overrides`` parameter is optional
and can be used to override a specific container attribute like the image
or the container user. The parameter takes a dictionary where each key is the
container name and its parameters that we want to override. These parameters
have to exist and are the ones that define the container configuration. Note
that it doesn't write down the overrides in the JSON file so if an update /
upgrade is executed, the container will be re-configured with the configuration
that is in the JSON file.


.. include::
   ../collections/osp/edpm/edpm_container_manage_role.rst

.. _podman_container: https://github.com/containers/ansible-podman-collections
